# Floyd's Cycle Detection Algorithm

Imagine a scenario where there are two runners, `a` and `b`, about to run around a circular field. If `a` runs at a speed of `1` and `b` runs twice as fast as `a` (i.e., `b = 2 * a`), then with both maintaining their respective speeds, `b` will catch up with `a` in his second lap, even though `a` is only in his first lap.

Take a moment to process that.

This simple example illustrates the fundamental idea behind Floyd's Cycle Detection Algorithm.

Floyd's Cycle Detection Algorithm, also known as the Hare-Tortoise algorithm, uses a two-pointer technique. It employs two variables, `slow` and `fast`, to traverse the sequence at different speeds, effectively detecting cycles or repeating elements.

A common use case of this algorithm is in detecting a cycle in a linked list. With two pointers, `fast` and `slow`, both starting at the head of the list, they move at different speeds:

- **Slow pointer** moves one step at a time (`slow = slow.next`).
- **Fast pointer** moves two steps at a time (`fast = fast.next.next`).

In each iteration:

- If `fast` reaches `null`, it means there are no cycles, as the last node in the list points to `null`.
- If `fast` doesn’t reach `null` and eventually catches up to `slow`, it indicates the presence of a cycle, because a certain node must be pointing back to a previous node, causing `fast` to revolve in a loop.

#### Why does this work?

This works because the fast pointer moves faster and, as it cycles, will eventually overlap with the slow pointer if a cycle exists. If no cycle exists, the fast pointer will eventually reach `null`.

<video src="ll-no-cycle-anim.mp4"></video>

<video src="ll-cycle-anim.mp4"></video>

#### Implementation for detecting a cycle in a Linked List

```python
def detectCycle(linkedlist):
    slow, fast = linkedlist.head, linkedlist.head
    
    while fast and fast.next:
        slow = slow.next
        fast = fast.next.next
       	
        if fast == slow:
            return True
    
    return False
```



### Complexity Analysis

- **Time Complexity:** The algorithm runs in **O(n)** time because it only requires a single pass through the data structure (like a linked list or sequence). During this pass, both the `slow` and `fast` pointers move at different speeds, ensuring that the cycle (if present) is detected efficiently.
- **Space Complexity:** In terms of space, the algorithm uses a constant amount of extra space, i.e., **O(1)**. Only two pointers are needed, so no additional memory is required, regardless of the size of the input.

### Keynote

This article describes this algorithm using the linked list cycle detection problem. However, it's important to note that this algorithm can be applied to other problems involving:

- **Detecting cycles** in other types of data structures like arrays or graphs.
- **Finding repeating patterns** in sequences or arrays.
- **Traversal and optimization** in scenarios where repetitive or circular references may exist.

### Practice Problems

[141. Linked List Cycle](https://leetcode.com/problems/linked-list-cycle/)

[287. Find the Duplicate Number](https://leetcode.com/problems/find-the-duplicate-number/)