# Boyer-Moore Majority Voting Algorithm

Imagine you have an array of strings representing the candidates that different individuals voted for in an election, like this:

```python
candidates = ['mark', 'john', 'mark', 'henry', 'mark']
```

At a glance, it's clear that the winner of the election is `mark`. To find the winner programmatically, we can use a data structure like a hashmap to count each candidate's votes. However, this approach requires additional space, which can become inefficient with large datasets.

Boyer-Moore Voting Algorithm helps solve this problem without needing to use a significant amount of extra space.

### How does this work?

Let's simulate how this algorithm will work with our votes array:

```python
candidates = ['mark', 'john', 'mark', 'henry', 'mark']
```

We’ll initialize two variables, `cur_candidate` and `cur_candidate_votes`. Initially, `cur_candidate` will be set to `candidates[0]`, and `cur_candidate_votes` will be `1`, because if there was only one candidate, they would have won the election by default.

Now, we iterate from index `1` to `n-1`, where `n` is the length of the candidates array.

- At index `1`, we check if the candidate is still `mark`. If it is, we increment `cur_candidate_votes` by 1, meaning `mark` is still leading.
- If the candidate is not `mark`, we decrement `cur_candidate_votes` by 1. If `cur_candidate_votes` drops to `0`, we reset `cur_candidate` to the candidate at that index and set `cur_candidate_votes` to `1`, because a new potential candidate emerges.

By the end of the iteration, `cur_candidate` will hold the winner of the election.

<video src="moore-anim.mp4"></video>

**What if we modified `candidates`?**

```python
candidates = ['mark', 'john', 'mark', 'henry', 'sam']
```

At first glance, it may seem that the winner is still `mark`. However, will this algorithm detect that correctly? The answer is **no**, because for this algorithm to work perfectly, the major element (the winner) must appear more than `n/2` times in the array, where `n` is the length of the array.

#### But Why

This works efficiently when the majority element appears more than half of the time because it continuously adjusts the count of votes for the current candidate. When the candidate's votes drop to zero (i.e., `cur_candidate_votes` becomes 0), it means that the remaining elements are distributed among other candidates equally or in smaller proportions, which cannot represent a majority. This allows the algorithm to efficiently switch to the next potential majority candidate and continue the process until all elements are checked. The final candidate is then verified to see if their count is greater than `n /2`, ensuring that they are indeed the majority element.

**Note**: This necessitates a second scan of the original array to confirm that `cur_candidate` appears more than `n/2` times. If it doesn't, it indicates a draw between some candidates, and an alternative approach will be needed to accurately determine the winner.

### **Algorithm**

1. Initialization:
   - `cur_candidate` is initialized to the first element of the array.
   - `cur_candidate_votes` is set to 1.
2. First Scan:
   - If the current element matches `cur_candidate`, increment `cur_candidate_votes`.
   - Otherwise, decrement `cur_candidate_votes`.
     - If `cur_candidate_votes` becomes 0, update `cur_candidate` to the current element and reset `cur_candidate_votes` to 1.
3. Second Scan:
   - Count occurrences of `cur_candidate` in the array.
   - If its count is greater than `n/2`, return it as the majority element.
   - Otherwise, return `-1` (indicating no majority element).

### **Implementation**

```python
def boyerMoore(candidates):
	n = len(candidates)
	
    major_candidate, major_candidate_count = candidates[0], 1
    
    # first scan to find the major element
    for i in range(1, n):
        if candidates[i] == major_candidate:
            major_candidate_count += 1
        else:
            major_candidate_count -= 1
            if major_candidate_count == 0:
                major_candidate = candidates[i]
                major_candidate_count = 1  

    # verify if major candidate appeared more than n / 2 times
    times = 0
    for candidate in candidates:
        if candidate == major_candidate:
            times += 1
    
    if times > n / 2:
        return major_candidate
    
   	return "no major candidate found"
```



### Complexity Analysis

- **Time Complexity:** The algorithm involves two scans through the array. The first scan identifies the potential majority element in O(n) time, and the second scan verifies if the identified candidate appears more than n/2 times, also taking O(n) time. Thus, the overall time complexity is O(n).
- **Space Complexity:** The space complexity is `O(1)` since only two variables (`cur_candidate` and `cur_candidate_votes`) are used regardless of the input size. No additional data structures are required.

### **Practice Problems**

[169. Majority Element](https://leetcode.com/problems/majority-element/)

[Majority Element II](https://leetcode.com/problems/majority-element-ii/)