# **Overview of the Sliding Window technique**

The sliding window technique is an elegant and efficient approach used to solve problems involving linear data structures such as arrays or strings. It involves maintaining a subset or "window" within the data structure that expands or contracts based on certain conditions, allowing for continuous evaluation without restarting from the beginning each time. The window size can be fixed or dynamically adjusted based on the problem's requirements.

The basic idea of the two-pointer technique is to use pointers to represent the start and end boundaries of a window within a data structure. Initially, both pointers are set at the beginning, and the window is expanded by moving the end pointer to include new elements. In cases where the window size is fixed, one pointer might start at the beginning, and the other could be placed at a specific index, to maintain a constant window size while exploring the data. When a condition is met, the start pointer is moved to contract the window and potentially find a better solution.

The technique allows problems that might otherwise require nested loops to be solved in linear or near-linear time, typically O(n).

## **Example Demonstrating the Sliding Window technique**

Let's take a look at this example where we have an integer array `nums` consisting of `n` elements, and an integer `k`.

And we want to find the maximum average value of a subarray of `nums` whose **length is equal to** `k`.

Solving that problem using brute force approach means we evaluate the sum of all possible subarrays of size `k` and select the maximum among them. This approach has a time complexity of `O(n * k)` because, for each index `i`, we calculate the sum of  the next `k - 1`  elements, resulting in nested loops.

To reduce the time complexity to `O(n)`, we can use a sliding window approach. The sliding window method is effective here as we know the window size is fixed at `k`.

Here's how it can be implemented:

1. Calculate the initial sum of the first `k` elements, `window_sum` and set it as our initial maximum sum `maxSum`.
2. Place the `left` pointer at the first element and the `right` pointer at the `k`-th element.
3. Shift the window one index at a time by incrementing both `left` and `right` pointers.
   - Subtract the element at the `left` pointer from `window_sum`.
   - Add the element at the `right` pointer to `window_sum`.
4. Track the maximum `window_sum` and update `maxSum` during each iteration if necessary.

<video src="max-sum.mp4"></video>

**Implementation**

```python
def maximumSubArraySum(nums, k):
    window_sum = sum(nums[0:k])
    maxSum = window_sum
    
    left, right = 0, k
    
    while right < len(nums):
        window_sum -= nums[left]
        window_sum += nums[right]
        
        maxSum = max(maxSum, window_sum)
        
        left, right = left + 1, right + 1
   
	return maxSum
      
```

This approach reduces the time complexity to `O(n)` since we are only traversing the array once with the two pointers. 

------

Let's take a look at another example where the window size is dynamic.

Imagine you are given an array of lowercase alphabet characters, and your task is to find the length of the longest subarray that contains only the same character.

Using a brute-force approach, you would need to start from each character in the array and explore every consecutive character until a different one is encountered. The time complexity of this approach would be `O(n^2)` due to the worst-case scenario where all characters in the array are the same. In this situation, for each starting point, you would have to iterate over the remaining characters, leading to quadratic time complexity.

We can solve this problem more efficiently using the sliding window approach. This method dynamically adjusts the window size and tracks consecutive characters as we iterate through the array. Here’s how the sliding window approach works:

1. Create a variable `maxLength` initially set to negative infinity.
2. Start with two pointers, `left` and `right`, both set at the beginning of the array.
3. Move the `right` pointer to expand the window until a different character is found.
4. Once a different character is encountered, calculate the length of the current subarray (i.e., `right - left`). Update `maxLength`  if this subarray length is longer than previously recorded ones.
5. Set `left` to `right` to begin the search for the next subarray of identical characters. We do this because we know that any subarray starting before `right` would contain a different character and would not meet the criteria.
6. Continue this process until the `right` pointer reaches the end of the array.
7. Update `maxLength` to `window_size` before `right` reached the end of the array.

<video src="max-lgt.mp4"></video>

**Implementation**

```python
def maxConsecutiveChars(arr):
    maxLength = float('-inf')
    
    left, right = 0, 0
    
    while right < len(arr):
        if arr[right] != arr[left]:
            window_size = right - left
            maxLength = max(maxLength, window_size)
            left = right
            
      	right += 1
	
    window_size = right - left
    maxLength = max(maxLength, window_size)
  	
    return maxLength
```

This method ensures that each character in the array is only checked once, resulting in a time complexity of `O(n)`, which is significantly more efficient than the brute-force approach.

## **Advantages of the Sliding Window Technique**

1. Problems that might take O(n^2) time to solve using a brute-force approach can often be reduced to O(n) using the sliding window.
2. The technique only requires a few pointers and variables, minimizing memory usage compared to solutions that use auxiliary data structures.
3. It can be adjusted to work with fixed or variable window sizes, making it versatile for different types of problems.

## **Disadvantages of the Sliding Window Technique**

1. Understanding how and when to expand or contract the window can be challenging, especially for complex conditions.
2. It is best suited for problems involving contiguous subarrays or substrings and may not be applicable to problems requiring non-contiguous selections.
3. Properly handling edge cases such as overlapping elements or windows of varying sizes can introduce additional complexity.
4. Some problems may require preprocessing, such as sorting or initial condition checks, which can offset the time saved by the sliding window approach.

## **Practical Problems on Sliding Window**

- [Maximum Average Subarray I](https://leetprep.io/problems/643)
- [Longest Nice Substring](https://leetprep.io/problems/1763)
- [Longest Even Odd Subarray With Threshold](https://leetprep.io/problems/2760)

Explore more and more problems from the recommendations of any of those problems.