# **Overview of the Brute Force Algorithm**

A brute force algorithm is the most straightforward method for solving a problem. It involves systematically trying all possible solutions until the correct one is found.

While brute force guarantees that a solution will be found, the time it takes can vary greatly depending on the problem's size and complexity.

Consider an example where you forget the three-digit PIN for a numerical padlock. The only option might be to try every combination from 100 to 999 until the correct one is discovered. This process exemplifies brute force. As you can imagine, it can be time-consuming, highlighting its inefficiency for large-scale problems. However, brute force methods can often be enhanced using additional techniques. For instance, if you are confident that the first digit of the number is `5`, you can limit the search to the range of 500-599, significantly reducing the total number of attempts.

## **Example Demonstrating the Brute Force Algorithm**

Consider a basic example where we have a sorted array of integers `nums` with the values `[1, 3, 4, 7]`.

Suppose we want to select two indices `i` and `j` from `nums` such that the absolute difference between `nums[i]` and `nums[j]` is minimized. The brute force approach would involve trying every possible pair of indices `(i, j)` and tracking the smallest absolute difference encountered.

For example, we would:

1. Compare `nums[0]` with `nums[1]`, `nums[2]`, and `nums[3]`.
2. Repeat the process for `nums[1]` with `nums[2]` and `nums[3]`.
3. Continue until all possible pairs have been evaluated.

<video src="bf.mp4"></video>

This exhaustive search guarantees that we find the minimum absolute difference but may become inefficient as the array size increases.

### **Algorithm**

1. Initialize `md` to infinity.
2. Loop through each indices `i` in `nums`.
3. For each `i`, loop through every other indices `j`, excluding `i`.
4. Calculate the absolute difference `absDiff = abs(nums[i] - nums[j])`.
5. Update `md` to the minimum between it's current value and `absDiff`.
6. Return `md`.

**Implementation**

```python
def minimumAbsoluteDifference(nums):
    md = float('inf')

    for i in range(len(nums)):
        for j in range(len(nums)):
            if i == j:
                continue
            absDiff = abs(nums[i] - nums[j]) < md:
           	md = min(md, absDiff)
            
    return md
```



The **Time Complexity** is `O(n^2)` where `n` is the number of elements in `nums`, due to the nested loops, while the **Space Complexity** is O(1) as we are only using a constant amount of additional space.

This algorithm can be improved using the two-pointer technique. Visit our article on the [two-pointer technique](https://leetprep.io/courses/algorithms/two-pointers) to see how we can improve this.

## **Advantages of the Brute Force Algorithm**

1. It is easy to understand and implement, requiring minimal analysis.
2. It is guaranteed that a solution is found if one exists.
3. It can be applied to a wide range of problems without needing problem-specific optimizations.
4. The algorithm is straightforward, making it easy to trace and debug.
5. It serves as a benchmark for comparing more advanced algorithms.

## **Disadvantages of the Brute Force Algorithm**

1. It takes an excessive amount of time for large-scale problems due to its exhaustive nature.
2. It consumes significant computational resources, especially as input size grows.
3. It struggles to handle problems that require exploring vast solution spaces.
4. It's rarely the most efficient solution when alternatives are available.
5. it's often impractical for real-world applications where time and resources are limited.
