## [2406. Divide Intervals Into Minimum Number of Groups](https://leetcode.com/problems/divide-intervals-into-minimum-number-of-groups/)

To solve this problem, we'll explore 2 possible approaches:

1. Brute Force
2. Min Heap (Priority Queues)

Regardless of the approach used in this article, the first step is to sort the `intervals` array by their left values. If there are overlapping left values, sort by their right values as well.

### **Approach 1: BruteForce**

In this approach, we will evaluate every possible combination of intervals to determine if they can be grouped together without overlapping.

For example, given the `intervals` as `[[1, 5], [1, 10], [2, 3], [5, 10], [6, 8]]`, we can create an additional array called `endIntervals`, which is initially empty.

For each interval `intervals[i]`, we will iterate through the `endIntervals` array to find an index `j` where the start of the current interval (`intervals[i][0]`) is greater than the end time of the interval stored in `endIntervals[j]`. If we find such an index, it indicates that the current interval can be merged with the interval corresponding to `endIntervals[j]`, as they do not overlap. In this case, we replace the value at `endIntervals[j]` with the end time of the current interval (`intervals[i][1]`). Finally, the size of `endIntervals` will be our answer.

Example Walkthrough:

> `intervals = [[5,10],[6,8],[1,5],[2,3],[1,10]]`
>
> After sorting, `intervals = [[1, 5], [1, 10], [2, 3], [5, 10], [6, 8]]`
>
> `endIntervals = []`
>
> ```
> for i = 0, interval = [1, 5]; iterating through endIntervals:
>     endIntervals is empty, so we create a new group and append 5 to endIntervals (the end time).
> 
> for i = 1, interval = [1, 10]; iterating through endIntervals:
>     j = 0, endIntervals[j] = 5, and it's not < 1, continue.
>     endIntervals array remains [5], so we append 10 (the current end time) to endIntervals
>     endIntervals = [5, 10]
> 
> for i = 2, interval = [2, 3]; iterating through endIntervals:
>     j = 0, endIntervals[j] = 5, and it's not < 2, continue.
>     j = 1, endIntervals[j] = 10, and it's not < 2, continue.
>     endIntervals array remains [5, 10], so we append 3 (the current end time) to end intervals
>     endIntervals = [5, 10, 3]
> 
> for i = 3, interval = [5, 10]; iterating through endIntervals:
>     j = 0, endIntervals[j] = 5, and it's not < 5, continue.
>     j = 1, endIntervals[j] = 10, and it's not < 5, continue.
>     j = 2, endIntervals[j] = 3, and it's < 5, we replace endIntervals[j] with 10 (the end time)..
>     endIntervals = [5, 10, 10]
> 
> for i = 4, interval = [6, 8]; iterating through endIntervals:
>     j = 0, endIntervals[j] = 5, and it's < 6, we replace endIntervals[j] with 8 (the end time)..
>     endIntervals = [6, 10, 10]
> ```

In the end, we have three groups in `endIntervals`, representing the minimum number of groups we can create. This is because we made every effort to merge each interval with an existing group before resorting to creating a new one. This method can be classified as a **Greedy** approach

#### **Algorithm**

1. Initialize a new variable `n` to the size of the `intervals` array.
2. Create an empty array called `endIntervals` to store the end times of the groups.
3. Sort the `intervals` array by their left values, and by their right values if the left values are the same.
4. Loop through the `intervals` array using an index `i` from `0` to `n - 1`:
   - Retrieve the current interval `intervals[i]` as `[start, end]`.
   - Initialize a boolean variable `added` to `false` to track if the interval is added to any existing group.
   - Loop through the `endIntervals` array using an index `j` from `0` to `endIntervals.size() - 1`:
     - If `endIntervals[j]` is less than `start`, update `endIntervals[j]` to `end` and set `added` to `true`, then break out of the inner loop.
   - If `added` is still `false`, append `end` to the `endIntervals` array, indicating that a new group is created.
5. The number of groups is equal to the size of the `endIntervals` array.

#### **Implementation**

```python
class Solution:
    def minGroups(self, intervals: List[List[int]]) -> int:
        intervals.sort(key=lambda x: (x[0], x[1]))
        endIntervals = []

        for start, end in intervals:
            added = False
            for j in range(len(endIntervals)):
                if endIntervals[j] < start:
                    endIntervals[j] = end
                    added = True
                    break
            if not added:
                endIntervals.append(end)

        return len(endIntervals)

```

#### **Time and Space Complexity Analysis**

- ##### **Time Complexity**:

  - Sorting the `intervals` list: `intervals.sort()` sorts the list based on their left and right values. This takes `O(n log n)`, where `n` is the number of intervals.

  - Iteration Breakdown:
    - The outer loop runs `n` times, once for each interval.
    - The inner loop iterates through the `endIntervals` array, which can run up to `n` times in the worst case for each iteration of the outer loop.

​	Thus, the combined time complexity of the nested loops is `O(n × n) = O(n^2)`.

​	Therefore, the overall **Time Complexity** is `O(n^2)` since `O(n^2)` dominates `O(n log n)`.

- **Space Complexity** is `O(n)` due to the additional `endIntervals` array, which can hold up to `n` elements in the worst case.

### **Approach 2: Min Heap (Priority Queue)**

This approach seeks to enhance the first method, so please review the initial approach if you haven’t already.

In the first method, while iterating through theend intervals array, we aim to find the minimum possible end time. Instead of using an array for this purpose, we can utilize a min heap, which allows us to retrieve the minimum end time in `O(1)` time rather than `O(n)` time.

### **Algorithm**

1. Initialize a new variable `n` to the size of the `intervals` array.

2. Create an empty min heap called `minHeap` to store the end times of the groups.

3. Sort the `intervals` array by their left values, and by their right values if the left values are the same.

4. Loop through the `intervals` array using an index `i` from `0` to `n - 1`:

   - Retrieve the current interval `intervals[i]` as `[start, end]`.

   - Check if the minHeap is not empty and if the minimum value in the heap is less than `start`:
     - If true, pop the minimum end time from the heap.

5. Push the current `end` into the `minHeap`.

6. The number of groups is equal to the size of the `minHeap`.

**Implementation**

```python
class Solution:
    def minGroups(self, intervals: List[List[int]]) -> int:
        intervals.sort(key=lambda x: (x[0], x[1]))
        minHeap = []

        for start, end in intervals:
            if minHeap and minHeap[0] < start:
                heapq.heappop(minHeap)
            heapq.heappush(minHeap, end)

        return len(minHeap)
```

#### **Time and Space Complexity Analysis**

- ##### **Time Complexity**: 

  - Sorting the `intervals` list: `intervals.sort()` sorts the list based on their left and right values. This takes `O(n log n)`, where `n` is the number of intervals.

  - Iteration Breakdown:

    - The loop runs nnn times, once for each interval.
    - Each iteration checks and possibly pops the minimum end time from the min heap, which takes `O(log k)`, where `k` is the number of groups (or end times currently in the heap). In the worst case, `k` can be `n`, leading to a time complexity of `O(log n` for each pop operation.
    - The push operation into the min heap also takes `O(log k)`, leading to a similar worst-case time complexity.

    Thus, the combined time complexity of the loop is `O(n log n)`

  Therefore, the overall **Time Complexity** is `O(n log n)` since the sorting step dominates the complexity.

- The **Space Complexity** remains the same as in the first approach.



Thanks for reading this article, and i hope i helped you understand. Always feel free to **<u>[Book A Session](https://leetprep.io/book-session)</u>** with me if you need extra help.